RFC: Platform-wide VFS developer documentation will be viewed on the VA Platform Website; component-specific technical documentation will be viewed on the Console UI (#33)
department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-platform-architecture: rfc/2022/2022-07-13 - Platform Wide Documentation vs Component Specific Documentation Locations.md

Example:
    - The website will be built using the XZY framework
-->

* Comment Deadline: `2022-08-31`
* Team Crew and Name: [Platform/Spike Teams/Console UI](https://github.com/orgs/department-of-veterans-affairs/teams/platform-pst-console-ui)
* Authors:
  * [Thomas Ferrin](https://github.com/TPurple)
  * [John Chapin](https://github.com/jchapin)
  * [Susanna Kline](https://github.com/sdk-irl)
* [Original RFC Pull Request](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-platform-architecture/pull/33)

## Background

The Platform currently has at least three locations for documentation:
* The (Platform website)[https://depo-platform-documentation.scrollhelp.site/index.html], which uses (Scroll Viewport)[https://www.k15t.com/software/scroll-viewport/scroll-viewport-for-confluence-cloud] to display specific content hosted in Confluence. This website hosts the following types of content:
    * **“Getting started”** content for onboarding VFS team members to work on the Platform
    * **“Developer docs”** content about writing and submitting code for review
    * **“Research and design”** content for adhering to the Platform’s guidance for research and design

>     * **“Analytics and insights”** content, such as for analytics, KPI dashboards, and monitoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * **“Analytics and insights”** content for analytics, KPI dashboards, and monitoring
```

>     * **“Collaboration cycle”** documentation of the process that VFS teams are required to follow to ensure quality for all products and featured launched on [va.gov](http://va.gov/).

Reviewer: I think this is either supposed to be "features launched" or "featured launches" but am leaning toward the first, so that's what I included in the suggestion
```suggestion
    * **“Collaboration cycle”** documentation of the process that VFS teams are required to follow to ensure quality for all products and features launched on [va.gov](http://va.gov/).
```

    * **“Support”** policies and incident management
    * **“User guides, how-to instructions, tutorials, or reference documents for VFS teams”** ((source)[https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/CUI/pages/2186543112/RFC+DRAFT+Documentation+Locations+-+Console+UI])
* (Operational documentation)[https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AP/pages/1287782439] throughout Confluence, which includes internal content such as “(meeting notes, roles and responsibilities documentation, decision documentation, [and] initiative outlines.)[https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AP/pages/1287782439]”

> * The [design.va.gov](https://design.va.gov) site contains the content style guide, components, and patterns include guidance, standards, and tools to help teams build a consistent, intuitive, and Veteran-centered experience across VA.gov.

Reviewer: should be "that include" or "including", either works

```suggestion
* The [design.va.gov](https://design.va.gov) site contains the content style guide, components, and patterns that include guidance, standards, and tools to help teams build a consistent, intuitive, and Veteran-centered experience across VA.gov.
```

1. **A clear relationship between the Platform Console and the Platform Website.** We propose that the Console and Website contain numerous references to each other. For example, if a component in the Console catalog has documentation that is relevant to all VFS users, it should have a link to Platform Website documentation on the topic. If the Platform Website has a page that mentions technical documentation that not all VFS teams need, it should link to the relevant documentation in the Console catalog. 
1. **Storing documentation close to the software project/component.** Documentation for a component should be stored in the same repo as the component (where possible) or in a central documentation location and then ingested into the Console catalog, so it is easy to find.
1. **A self-service process for adding documentation.** Teams who own software components, services, and resources will register these entities in the Console catalog. They will include references to their technical documentation and spell out both upstream and downstream dependencies. They may also create catalog entries for dependencies (and their documentation) that are external to the VA.

>     1. Teams would create a ```/docs``` folder at the root of their project to contain markdown files and subfolders for organizing their documentation.

Reviewer 2: How is the project root defined in a shared repository such as `vets-api`?

Author: There are a few options and they start being described here: [How to understand techdocs-ref annotation values](https://backstage.io/docs/features/techdocs/how-to-guides#how-to-understand-techdocs-ref-annotation-values)

1. You can follow the standard directions "When you see dir:., you can translate it to mean:" which tell you how to host the documentation in a ```/docs``` folder alongside a ```/mkdocs.yml``` file and and a ```/docs/index.md``` starting page.
2. They also give you the option to specify a subfolder for everything, "dir:./sub-folder" so a VFS team with an app in the vets-website repo, or a team with an API collection can just move the entire bundle of documentation down into their subfolder in the project, but describe the root of their documentation as living in that path... relative to the root of the entire repository.
3. The third option is, "you can instead specify a URL location reference, the exact value of which will vary based on the source code hosting provider." This has a different start to the annotation, rather than ```dir:``` it would use ```url:``` and look something like this: ```url:https://github.com/backstage/backstage/tree/master/plugins/techdocs-backend/examples/documented-component```. So this could be used to refer to component documentation at an explicit URL in the repository, just with a different protocol/method for retrieving the documentation. It can also be used to potentially point to the GitHub Wiki repository... and that might be helpful for giving people a richer editing interface and another way to approach the documentation.

Author: Added to RFC

* New VFS and Platform team members will more easily be able to learn about the software projects that their team maintains.
* VFS and Platform team members can easily find and discover documentation about any VFS and Platform entity. The Console UI has interfaces for searching through all projects with documentation across the entire catalog. Each collection of documentation also has a search interface that will confine searches to specific projects or assets.
* Each component’s source code and documentation will be easier to find and less likely to be lost than if they were stored in diverse locations.
* With connections between component and their documentation better maintained, it will be easier to care for each software component, its documentation, and systems that depend upon the component.
* With each component's documentation stored close to its source code, it will be easier to run automated checks to see if each component's documentation is up to date. Keeping the documentation with the source code also ensures that we're following VA policy to make all documentation publicly accessible.

> * Confidence in having access to a single source of truth to ensure that engineers have access to the most relevant, up-to-date information

Reviewer: noun for parallel construction
```suggestion
* VFS and Platform team members will have confidence in their access to a single source of truth, ensuring that engineers have access to the most relevant, up-to-date information.
```

* If the Console UI system is retired, all dispersed component-specific documentation loses its central location for being found. This scenario would be a sub-optimal situation but still better than storing documentation in a central system separate from the source code of assets. Elimination of such a system may permanently separate software from the documentation.

## Alternatives

* We could drive people to add documentation for their components/projects to the Platform Website. The risk associated with this alternative is that documentation may become separated from source code and add irrelevant documentation to some VFS developer audiences.
* We could encourage developers to use a system like Confluence for all component-specific technical documentation. But that may incur additional licensing costs and the possibility that all documentation is lost if Confluence, or a similar system, is retired. Also, VFS team members do not always have access to Confluence.

> **Questions from Platform Content team to consider:**

Reviewer: These questions were added in as if they were part of the RFC, but I think they need to be removed if they've been addressed?

Author: I have removed them. Thanks for noticing @sdk-irl.

* With each component’s documentation stored close its source code, it will be easier to run automated checks to see if each component’s documentation is up to date.

## Risks

* A risk of this strategy is that Platform-wide documentation intended for all VFS developers could be mistakenly added to the Console instead of the Platform Website, making it harder to find. Clear instructions will be needed to avoid this.
* If the Console UI system is retired, all dispersed component-specific documentation loses its central location for being found. This scenario would be a sub-optimal situation but still better than storing documentation in a central system separate from the source code of assets. Elimination of such a system may permanently separate software from the documentation.

## Alternatives

* We could drive people to add documentation for their components/projects to the Platform Website. The risk associated with this alternative is that documentation may become separated from source code, and it may add irrelevant documentation to some VFS developer audiences.

> * We could encourage developers to use a system like Confluence for all component-specific technical documentation. But that may incur additional licensing costs and the possibility that all documentation is lost if Confluence, or a similar system, is retired.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* We could encourage developers to use a system like Confluence for all component-specific technical documentation. But that may incur additional licensing costs and the possibility that all documentation is lost if Confluence, or a similar system, is retired. Also, VFS team members do not have always access to Confluence.
```

Author: Accepted.

    1. Documentation that should live in the Console catalog is:
        1. specific to a software component, API/service, or piece of infrastructure
        1. technical information needed for development
        1. intended for use by only a subset of VA teams or roles
    1. Examples include:
        1. Documentation that is internal to a VFS team
        1. Highly technical documentation about an infrastructure resource
        1. Documentation for VA APIs and downstream external services
1. **A clear relationship between the Platform Console and the Platform Website.** We propose that the Console and Website contain numerous references to each other. For example, if a component in the Console catalog has documentation that is relevant to all VFS users, it should have a link to Platform Website documentation on the topic. If the Platform Website has a page that mentions technical documentation that not all VFS teams need, it should link to the relevant documentation in the Console catalog. 

> 1. **Storing documentation close to the software project/component.** Documentation for a  component should be stored in the same repo as the the component (where possible) or in a central documentation location, and then ingested into the Console catalog so it easy to find.

Reviewer 4: This is very important and in line with the approach that my team is taking regarding where documentation should live. It seems like exposing these via the console will also help with overall discoverability of available documentation.

Author: @TPurple added https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-platform-architecture/pull/33/commits/3a9c5e2cd65ece69c086807489c5f66f469fbcf5 to highlight this point.

# RFC: Platform-wide VFS developer documentation will be viewed on the VA Platform Website; component-specific technical documentation will be viewed on the Console UI

<!--
The title is what you want comments on. Use the active voice in a future tense.
Example:
    - The website will be built using the XZY framework
-->

* Comment Deadline: `2022-08-31`
* Team Crew and Name: [Platform/Spike Teams/Console UI](https://github.com/orgs/department-of-veterans-affairs/teams/platform-pst-console-ui)
* Authors:
  * [Thomas Ferrin](https://github.com/TPurple)
  * [John Chapin](https://github.com/jchapin)
  * [Susanna Kline](https://github.com/sdk-irl)
* [Original RFC Pull Request](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-platform-architecture/pull/33)

## Background

The Platform currently has two centralized locations for documentation:
* The (Platform website)[https://depo-platform-documentation.scrollhelp.site/index.html], which uses (Scroll Viewport)[https://www.k15t.com/software/scroll-viewport/scroll-viewport-for-confluence-cloud] to display specific content hosted in Confluence. This website hosts the following types of content:

>     * **“Getting started”** content for onboarding VFS team members to working on the Platform

Author: ```suggestion
    * **“Getting started”** content for onboarding VFS team members to work on the Platform
```

    * **“Developer docs”** content about writing and submitting code for review
    * **“Research and design”** content for adhering to the Platform’s guidance for research and design
    * **“Analytics and insights”** content, such as for analytics, KPI dashboards, and monitoring
    * **“Collaboration cycle”** content
    * **“Support”** policies and incident management
    * **“User guides, how-to instructions, tutorials, or reference documents for VFS teams”** ((source)[https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/CUI/pages/2186543112/RFC+DRAFT+Documentation+Locations+-+Console+UI])
* (Operational documentation)[https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AP/pages/1287782439] throughout Confluence, which includes internal content such as “(meeting notes, roles and responsibilities documentation, decision documentation, [and] initiative outlines.)[https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AP/pages/1287782439]”

> While Confluence and the Platform website do contain a lot of helpful documentation for VFS (and Platform) teams, a lot of documentation—specifically more technical documentation that is specific to a software component, service, or infrastructure resource—is found throughout various GitHub repositories. This type of documentation is vital to developers who are trying to troubleshoot or set up software dependencies, but it is much harder to find. Developers typically find it by asking around, receiving a few different answers, and sometimes finding different versions of the documentation. When they find the documentation, it is often difficult to know whether the documentation is complete or up to date. Additionally, some VFS teams rely on systems that are external to the VA and have had difficulty finding or maintaining documentation about these systems.

Author: ```suggestion
While Confluence and the Platform website contain helpful documentation for VFS (and Platform) teams, a lot of documentation—specifically technical documentation for a software component, service, or infrastructure resource—is found throughout various GitHub repositories. This documentation is vital to developers trying to troubleshoot or set up software dependencies, but it is much harder to find. Developers typically find it by asking around, receiving a few different answers, and sometimes finding different versions of the documentation. When they find the documentation, it is often difficult to know whether it is complete or up to date. Additionally, some VFS teams rely on systems external to the VA and have had difficulty finding or maintaining documentation about these systems.
```

Author: Dropping "a lot of" shows up twice in rapid succession.

## Motivation

> If we can make it easy for developers to locate and store technical documentation, we can save them hours (or even days) of extra work. Having a consistent method and location for finding this documentation is a crucial part of improving the experience and efficiency of VFS teams.

Author: ```suggestion
If we can make it easy for developers to locate and store technical documentation, we can save them hours (or days) of extra work. In addition, having a consistent method and location for finding this documentation is a crucial part of improving the experience and efficiency of VFS teams.
```

    1. Documentation that should live in the Console catalog is:
        1. specific to a software component, API/service, or piece of infrastructure
        1. technical information needed for development
        1. intended for use by only a subset of VA teams or roles
    1. Examples include:
        1. Documentation that is internal to a VFS team
        1. Highly technical documentation about an infrastructure resource
        1. Documentation for VA APIs and downstream external services
1. **A clear relationship between the Platform Console and the Platform Website.** We propose that the Console and Website contain numerous references to each other. For example, if a component in the Console catalog has documentation that is relevant to all VFS users, it should have a link to Platform Website documentation on the topic. If the Platform Website has a page that mentions technical documentation that not all VFS teams need, it should link to the relevant documentation in the Console catalog. 

> 1. **Storing documentation close to the software project/component.** Documentation for a  component should be stored in the same repo as the the component (where possible) or in a central documentation location, and then ingested into the Console catalog so it easy to find.

Author: ```suggestion
1. **Storing documentation close to the software project/component.** Documentation for a component should be stored in the same repo as the component (where possible) or in a central documentation location and then ingested into the Console catalog, so it is easy to find.
```

1. **A self-service process for adding documentation.** Teams who own software components, services, and resources will register these entities in the Console catalog. They will include references to their technical documentation and spell out both upstream and downstream dependencies. They may also create catalog entries for dependencies (and their documentation) that are external to the VA.

## Potential Benefits

Possible benefits of a centralized system for component-specific technical documentation include these:

* VFS and Platform teams will more easily maintain documentation about their software projects for themselves or others to reference later.
* VFS teams will find it easier to document information about downstream systems that are external to the VA.
* New VFS and Platform team members will more easily be able to learn about the software projects that their team maintains.

> * VFS and Platform team members will be able to more easily find and discover documentation about any VFS and Platform entity.

Author: ```suggestion
* VFS and Platform team members can easily find and discover documentation about any VFS and Platform entity.
```

* Each component’s source code and documentation will be easier to find and less likely to be lost than if they were stored in diverse locations.
* With connections between component and their documentation better maintained, it will be easier to care for each software component, its documentation, and systems that depend upon the component.

> * With each component’s documentation stored close its source code, it will be easier to run automated checks to see if each component’s documentation is up to date.

Author: ```suggestion
* With each component’s documentation stored close to its source code, it will be easier to run automated checks to see if each component’s documentation is up to date.
```

> * Confidence in having access to the single source of truth to ensure that engineers have access to the most relevant up-to-date information

Author: ```suggestion
* Confidence in having access to a single source of truth to ensure that engineers have access to the most relevant, up-to-date information
```

## Risks

> * A risk of this strategy is that Platform-wide documentation intended for all VFS developers could be mistakenly added to the Console instead of the Platform Website, making it harder to find. Clear instructions will be needed to avoid this.

Author: ```suggestion
* A risk of this strategy is that Platform-wide documentation intended for all VFS developers could be mistakenly added to the Console instead of the Platform Website, making it harder to find. Platform and VFS Engineers will need clear instructions to avoid this.
```

* If the Console UI system is retired, all dispersed component-specific documentation loses its central location for being found. This scenario would be a sub-optimal situation but still better than storing documentation in a central system separate from the source code of assets. Elimination of such a system may permanently separate software from the documentation.

## Alternatives

> * We could drive people to add documentation for their components/projects to the Platform Website. The risk associated with this alternative is that documentation may become separated from source code, and it may add irrelevant documentation to some VFS developer audiences.

Author: ```suggestion
* We could drive people to add documentation for their components/projects to the Platform Website. The risk associated with this alternative is that documentation may become separated from source code and add irrelevant documentation to some VFS developer audiences.
```

> * We could encourage developers to use a system like Confluence for all component-specific technical documentation. But that may incur additional licensing costs and the possibility that all documentation is lost if Confluence, or a similar system, is retired. Also, VFS team members do not have always access to Confluence.

Author: ```suggestion
* We could encourage developers to use a system like Confluence for all component-specific technical documentation. But that may incur additional licensing costs and the possibility that all documentation is lost if Confluence, or a similar system, is retired. Also, VFS team members do not always have access to Confluence.
```

# RFC: Platform-wide VFS developer documentation will be viewed on the VA Platform Website; component-specific technical documentation will be viewed on the Console UI

<!--
The title is what you want comments on. Use the active voice in a future tense.
Example:
    - The website will be built using the XZY framework
-->

* Comment Deadline: `2022-08-31`
* Team Crew and Name: [Platform/Spike Teams/Console UI](https://github.com/orgs/department-of-veterans-affairs/teams/platform-pst-console-ui)
* Authors:
  * [Thomas Ferrin](https://github.com/TPurple)
  * [John Chapin](https://github.com/jchapin)
  * [Susanna Kline](https://github.com/sdk-irl)
* [Original RFC Pull Request](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-platform-architecture/pull/33)

## Background

> The Platform currently has two centralized locations for documentation:

Reviewer 5: Since the design system is part of the Platform, should design.va.gov be included here?

Reviewer 6: Yes, it should

Author: I have added it in my upcoming review changes.

> The Platform currently has two centralized locations for documentation:

Author: ```suggestion
The Platform currently has at least three locations for documentation:
```

Author: Dropping two and centralized since it seems odd to say they're centralized in multiple locations... they're central to their domains/concerns.

* The (Platform website)[https://depo-platform-documentation.scrollhelp.site/index.html], which uses (Scroll Viewport)[https://www.k15t.com/software/scroll-viewport/scroll-viewport-for-confluence-cloud] to display specific content hosted in Confluence. This website hosts the following types of content:
    * **“Getting started”** content for onboarding VFS team members to work on the Platform
    * **“Developer docs”** content about writing and submitting code for review
    * **“Research and design”** content for adhering to the Platform’s guidance for research and design
    * **“Analytics and insights”** content, such as for analytics, KPI dashboards, and monitoring
    * **“Collaboration cycle”** content
    * **“Support”** policies and incident management
    * **“User guides, how-to instructions, tutorials, or reference documents for VFS teams”** ((source)[https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/CUI/pages/2186543112/RFC+DRAFT+Documentation+Locations+-+Console+UI])

> * (Operational documentation)[https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AP/pages/1287782439] throughout Confluence, which includes internal content such as “(meeting notes, roles and responsibilities documentation, decision documentation, [and] initiative outlines.)[https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AP/pages/1287782439]”

Author: ```suggestion
* (Operational documentation)[https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AP/pages/1287782439] throughout Confluence, which includes internal content such as “(meeting notes, roles and responsibilities documentation, decision documentation, [and] initiative outlines.)[https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AP/pages/1287782439]”
* The [design.va.gov](https://design.va.gov) site contains the content style guide, components, and patterns include guidance, standards, and tools to help teams build a consistent, intuitive, and Veteran-centered experience across VA.gov.
```

> While Confluence and the Platform website contain helpful documentation for VFS (and Platform) teams, a lot of documentation—specifically technical documentation for a software component, service, or infrastructure resource—is found throughout various GitHub repositories. This documentation is vital to developers trying to troubleshoot or set up software dependencies, but it is much harder to find. Developers typically find it by asking around, receiving a few different answers, and sometimes finding different versions of the documentation. When they find the documentation, it is often difficult to know whether it is complete or up to date. Additionally, some VFS teams rely on systems external to the VA and have had difficulty finding or maintaining documentation about these systems.

Reviewer 5: Could you provide some definition of what you mean by a "software component"? Or use a different word or phrase that might be clearer to those of us who have not worked with Backstage? I understand that Backstage uses the word "component" in a specific way, but it is not a common usage of this word and I'm struggling a little to understand exactly what it means here. It's difficult, I think, because depending on the context the word "component" is used to mean several different things, so adding one more definition almost feels like overload.

Reviewer 7: In general, do we mean to use CUI as a viewing (only) platform the intended documentation or  would edits and maintenance have to happen within CUI?

Also, I second Chris' concerns.
1. It should be easily sharable, especially in  Slack, Google Meet, and Zoom.
2. (Search). More than any other feature, search adds the most leverage when sifting through docs. I will specify one feature I would like to see implemented: phrase search ( or better yet boolean search) as to the aggregate of all words entered in the search field.
3. (Do we need to be logged in) While it's true that having  documentation in a central location is nice, it's also important to have least amount of hurdles to access as possible.

Reviewer 6: We're struggling with wording a bit here. Backstage has multiple types of "entities," including users, groups, APIs, websites, etc. We were trying to find a term that refers to software entities (not people entities). So "software component" here refers to any website or part of a website, as well as any API or service. I think we would also include infrastructure to some extent. So this includes things like forms, auth-N/auth-Z mechanisms, APIs, microservices—chunks of software that make up VA.org. Does that clear it up?

Reviewer 5: Kind of... I think the problem is that we already use the word "component" to mean something different on the Platform (design system component, application component, etc), there is significant potential here for confusion and misunderstanding.

Reviewer 6: @k80bowman we're writing documentation about the Console that will go on the Platform Website. I think we did a fairly good job at clarifying this issue in that documentation. You can check out the [draft on Confluence](https://vfs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/PWD/pages/2311585838/The+Console+Catalog#Entity-Types-in-the-Catalog)

## Motivation

If we can make it easy for developers to locate and store technical documentation, we can save them hours (or days) of extra work. In addition, having a consistent method and location for finding this documentation is a crucial part of improving the experience and efficiency of VFS teams.

## Design

> We propose that the central location for viewing component-specific technical documentation—including APIs, software components, and infrastructure—should be the Console catalog. The catalog makes it easy for users to navigate an org chart-type view of the VA ecosystem (including VFS apps, Platform services, and user groups) and quickly find documentation about any part of it.

Reviewer 5: How does design system documentation fit into this? We need to keep it public and independent of the Console, but it seems that it would fit within your definition of "component-specific technical documentation" here.

Reviewer 6: Since it is not specific to a single software entity—and is a resource for all VFS teams—there's no reason for Design System documentation to move at all.

Reviewer 5: Should that be indicated here?

Author: > Should that be indicated here?

Will do.
